.. _v0.6


Version 0.6 beta
================

Version 0.6 is in beta.
You can install it like this::

    pip install --upgrade --pre otree-core
    otree resetdb

Note the ``--pre`` flag, which is necessary since oTree 0.6 is a pre-release.
A new pre-release is published frequently,
so it's good to run the above commands every few days,
to get the latest bugfixes.

Here are the new features:

Browser bots
~~~~~~~~~~~~

Version 0.6 allows you to run your bots not only on the command line,
but in your browser as well.

Running bots in the browser gives a more realistic measurement of your app's performance.
Also, it can surface bugs that would not be detected with command-line bot testing,
such as problems with JavaScript or wait page redirects.

Previously, some people did browser testing by setting a low ``timeout_seconds``
on each page, but browser bots (1) are faster, (2) don't require you to mix debug/test code in with your production code,
and (3) let you reuse your ``tests.py`` bots.

How to use browser bots
```````````````````````

First, make sure you have defined bots for each of your app.
See :ref:`here <bots>`.

Then, in ``settings.py``, set ``USE_BROWSER_BOTS = True``.

Then, when you create a new session and open the links,
the page will auto-play according to the bots you defined in your ``tests.py``.

Rooms
~~~~~

The :ref:`rooms <rooms>` feature is more fully developed and functional.

Misc admin improvements
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Version 0.6 also makes various improvements, e.g. to the admin interface.
